well over the years children have paid a
heavy price from Israel's offensives on
Gaza hundreds have been killed many more
maimed or injured and left living with
trauma fear and grief let's go back to
2008 that's when Israel launched its
so-called operation castled a
devastating surprise air and ground
offensive on Gaza that lasted 23 days
342 children were killed Israel's
military operation in 2012 took the
lives of at least 30 Palestinian
children some as young as 2 years old in
2014 547 were killed in 50 days most as
a direct result of Israeli attacks in
2021 at least 67 died in 11 days of
conflict and in only nine days of War
this month as we were saying more than a
thousand have been killed that's the
worst toll on Palestinian children in
years the un's children's agency says
time is running out for those in Gaza
Pat Breen is a former Irish trade
Minister a former chair of the Foreign
Relations Committee in Ireland's
Parliament sir you're joining us from
limmerick in the Republic of Ireland
we're trying to analy how are you good
afternoon it's good to have you on the
show we've been looking at how various
countries stand in this conflict what
they've been saying what they've been
doing I'd like your thoughts on Europe's
position since the beginning of this
war well first of all can I say to you
uh the picture in one of Irish Ireland's
daadi's new newspaper this morning the
Irish independent of two small children
and the fear and the pain in their face
and eyes is Illustrated very clearly in
the photograph and it happened just
after a bombardment of Gaza yesterday
and of course the Irish government are
very concerned uh about what's happening
in Gaza and we have been concerned about
this over over the history of of the
conflicts over 75 years I visited Gaza
myself back after after operation Cate
in 2009 to see from as firsthand uh the
destruction after operation Cate and um
you know to say that today the U
bombardment of Gaza is is the worst in
75 years um is something you know that
that you know you have to just can't
imagine and the Irish government are
concerned the Prime Minister last
evening met president mcon at the at the
Alis palace in Paris and they um you
know shared ideas of how to get both the
French and the Irish Nationals out of um
G Gaza in the event of the Raa uh Gates
opening um France and irand are very
aligned in in the in the way we're
dealing with this project we believe
that Israel has a right to protect
itself but it doesn't um you know have a
right uh to break humanitarian law and
that's something that's you know that's
very much evident at the moment we are
very concerned U that the uh an
operation will take place in the coming
days both from air sea and land uh into
Gaza and this would cause um huge huge
humanitarian problems um it's not
possible first walk and I just said to
you to move a million people from
northern Gaza to Southern Gaza and where
do these people go Southern G Gaza is
already full and they have to you know
their their houses are being bombarded
where to go when they come back trying
to find hamis trying to find an needle
in a HC so it's a very difficult
situation and I would hope that the um
you know the return visit now by
secretary blink to Israel that he will
bring back a message from the other Arab
leaders that uh a ground Invasion
shouldn't
happen does Ireland have Nationals in
Gaza well we have about 40 Nationals in
Gaza at the moment most them would be
working with the United Nations or they
would have Jewel passports as well I
mean that's the concern for the foreign
minister at the moment Mall Martin uh he
spoke to um the um president of the
European Council last night sha Michelle
in relation to this and to make cons
consy contingency plans to get these
people out of um Gaza should the um you
know the refa um Border Gates open uh we
don't know this morning what's going to
happen here Israel says it probably
won't hope it happen at the moment but
it's it's important that for
humanitarian reasons that that gate
opens as quickly as possible uh to get
people that need humanitarian assistance
those injured we've talked about a
thousand children dead there are
thousands more in hospitals and we're
told that within 24 hours there'll be no
electricity um uh to to man the um the
hospital um you know technology to keep
these people alive and that's a very
worrying Factor indeed all right Pat
Breen former Irish trade Minister former
chair of the Foreign Relations Committee
in Ireland's Parliament thank you very
much for joining us on the program
today